---
title: "The Evicted Families of Derryveagh"
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
categories:
  - texts
tags:
  - Ireland
  - Derryveagh
  - Donegal
---
The names of people uprooted in April 1861 by order of John George Adair.
<!--more-->

## Altnadogue
  - Hugh Sweeney and two sons.
  - James Sweeney, his wife and eight children.
  - Owen Sweeney, his wife, mother and eight children.

## Ardatur
  - Daniel Mc Award, his wife and six children.
  - Charles Doohan, his wife, son and two grandchildren.
  - William Doohan, his wife and four children.
  - John Doohan, his wife and five children.
  - Connell Doohan and his wife.
  - Patrick Curran, his wife and five children.

## Bingorms
  - Hanna Mc Award, widow and six children.
  - Joseph Mc McCormick and five children.

## Castletown
  - Bryan Doherty, his child, mother and sister.
  - Hugh Coll, his wife and four children.
  - Patrick Devenny, his wife and two children.
  - John Friel, his wife and two children.
  - Michael Friel, his wife and two children.
  - Robert Burke and his wife.
  - Charles Callaghan
  - John Moore, his wife and two children.   
  - Manus Rodden, his brother and two sisters - all orphans.
  - Bernard Callaghan, his mother and brother.


## Claggan
  - John Bradley, his wife and three children.
  - Michael Bradley, his wife and four children.
  - Catherine Conaghan, widow and two children.


## Drumnalifferney
  - Owen Mc Award, his wife and four children.
  - Mary Mc Award, widow and three children.

## Maghernashangan
  - James McMonagle, his wife and six children.
  - John Brady, his wife and five children.
  - Francis Bradley, his wife and five children.
  - Patrick Bradley, his wife and four children.
  - John and Fanny Bradley - deaf and dumb - allowed to remain in possession at least temporarily.
  - Roger O'Flanigan, his wife, mother and four children.


## Sruhangarrow
  - Edward Sweeney and his three children.
  - Daniel Doherty, his wife, father and two children.
  - Bryan Doherty, his wife and four children.

## Staghall
  - Daniel Friel, his wife, child, mother and father.
  - William McAward, his wife and two children.
  - James Doherty, his wife and child.
  - James Lawn, his wife and nine children.

## Warrentown
  - Edward Coyle, his wife and child.
  - Knocker Friel, his wife and six children.
  - Knocker Kelly and two others.
  - William Armstrong and three children.
  - Alexander Lawn, his wife and four children.
  - Rose Dermott - Orphan -evicted and house levelled
